[« Previous Page : Open Standards](8_Definitions.md) | [Table of Contents](../README.md#table-of-contents)

## Annex A - Legal

- [Intellectual property](#intellectual-property)
- [Managing Licence Obligations](#managing-licence-obligations)
- [Patent Management](#patent-management)

### Intellectual property

#### Licences

##### Disclaimers

Most OSS licences include a disclaimer of warranty that aims to be as exhaustive as possible in ensuring that no warranty applies. For example, the following clause in the [Mozilla Public License Version 2](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/MPL/2.0/) (MPLv2) demonstrates a typical incarnation of this licence term:
>  Covered Software is provided under this License on an “as is” basis, without warranty of any kind, either expressed, implied, or statutory, including, without limitation, warranties that the Covered Software is free of defects, merchantable, fit for a particular purpose or non-infringing. The entire risk as to the quality and performance of the Covered Software is with You. Should any Covered Software prove defective in any respect, You (not any Contributor) assume the cost of any necessary servicing, repair, or correction. This disclaimer of warranty constitutes an essential part of this License. No use of any Covered Software is authorized under this License except under this disclaimer.

As shown, in addition to setting out that the licence is “without warranty of any kind”, these clauses are most often careful to exclude any warranty of “merchantability” or “fitness for a particular purpose”. This serves to clarify and make certain that these two warranties do not apply, as some legislation might otherwise impose them as implicit terms of a contract or licence. For example, where software is sold in Ontario, the [Sale of Goods Act](https://www.ontario.ca/laws/statute/90s01) imposes implied warranties relating to merchantability (Section 13) and, in some cases, warranties of fitness for a particular purpose (Section 15). However, with the explicit exclusions in typical OSS licences, these warranties do not apply.

Many licences also explicitly disclaim warranties of non-infringement (for example, the MPLv2, as set out above). This disclaimer aims to exclude the U.S. doctrine of an implied warranty of non infringement in the [Uniform Commercial Code § 2-312](https://www.law.cornell.edu/ucc/2/2-312), which otherwise warrants that the software does not infringe any third party's copyright. For example, if a software developer uploaded a piece of code to an OSS project and it originally came from copyright-protected closed-source software, anyone downloading or using the OSS application would technically infringe the copyright. If sued for such an infringement, the warranty of non infringement would result in such a user having no recourse against the distributors or developers – it is “users beware”. In Canada, even though a specific doctrine of a warranty of non-infringement does not exist, this licence clause still likely disclaims similar warranties of title (especially when considered in conjunction with a broad disclaimer against warranties of “any kind” in the [Sale of Goods Act](https://www.ontario.ca/laws/statute/90s01), Section 13). As well as disclaiming warranties, nearly all OSS licences disclaim liability. For example, the MPLv2 states:
>  Under no circumstances and under no legal theory, whether tort (including negligence), contract, or otherwise, shall any Contributor, or anyone who distributes Covered Software as permitted above, be liable to You for any direct, indirect, special, incidental, or consequential damages of any character including, without limitation, damages for lost profits, loss of goodwill, work stoppage, computer failure or malfunction, or any and all other commercial damages or losses, even if such party shall have been informed of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall not apply to liability for death or personal injury resulting from such party’s negligence to the extent applicable law prohibits such limitation. Some jurisdictions do not allow the exclusion or limitation of incidental or consequential damages, so this exclusion and limitation may not apply to You.

Again, this disclaimer broadly aims to cover all bases of liability and all types of damages that could occur. The result is that when you use OSS, you do so at your own risk.

Given that the contributor (in this case the Government of Canada) carries no liability and offers no form of warranty for any contributions made or products produced they must also forgo any form of meaningful or perceived ownership over the code or product generated.

Although these disclaimers are standard in nearly all OSS licences, licensors can modify them. In some cases, an OSS licence allows the licensor to set out additional disclaimers. For example, the MPLv2 allows a licensor to “include additional disclaimers of warranty and limitations of liability specific to any jurisdiction”. In other cases, a licensor may do the opposite and choose to offer a warranty or accept liability, removing the effect of the disclaimer of warranty. For instance, the MPLv2 provides that “You may choose to offer and to charge a fee for warranty, support, indemnity or liability obligations to one or more recipients of Covered Software”.

##### Notice Obligations

Like disclaimers, a notice obligation clause comes standard in nearly every OSS licence. This is an obligation to reproduce the licence text (either directly or through a hyperlink) whenever you reproduce the licenced work. In addition, notice obligations usually require distributions of the work to retain other notices that come with it – for example, copyright assertions, additional disclaimers of warranty or liability, or patent notices. Notice obligations usually at least apply to distribution of the source code, but, depending on the licence, often apply to redistribution of the object code as well. As one example of a typical notice obligation, the MPLv2 licence provides:
>  You may not remove or alter the substance of any license notices (including copyright notices, patent notices, disclaimers of warranty, or limitations of liability) contained within the Source Code Form of the Covered Software, except that You may alter any license notices to the extent required to remedy known factual inaccuracies.

##### Source Code Obligations

Reciprocal licences usually include a “source code obligation” that requires anyone distributing the work to include, or at least link to, the source code. This ensures that the software remains in a format that downstream users can continue to modify. Without such a requirement, someone could make changes to software under a reciprocal licence, but only redistribute the object code. This would make it impossible for others to make further changes or re-integrate any of the changes back into the original project.

Although a source code obligation usually goes hand-in-hand with a reciprocal licence, it is worth noting that, in some cases, it may only attach to the originally-licensed code. This becomes particularly important when using software libraries. For example, closed-sourced software vendors can link-to and make use of OSS libraries that fall under a Lesser GNU Public License. As long as the closed-source software merely links to these libraries, the reciprocal obligation does not engage. The vendor has no obligation to release its own source code. However, the source code obligation still applies to the libraries themselves. The vendor has an obligation to redistribute or otherwise provide the original library source code along with the closed-source product.

In some cases, it is not feasible for a person to directly provide the source code along with the object code. If distributing software on a CD or DVD, space constraints may make it difficult to include both – especially considering the fact that source code can be much larger than object code. For this reason, licences are usually flexible about the manner in which you must provide the source code. For instance, the GPLv3 allows a person to provide, in lieu of the source code itself, a written offer to distribute the source code on a separate CD or through a network server. If distributing the object code over the internet, a person may also simply provide instructions on how to download the source code from another internet-connected server.

##### Reciprocal Licensing

There is one distinctive and commonly-encountered feature of OSS that tends to divide licences into two categories: those with a reciprocal obligation (also called “copyleft”, “share-alike”, or
“hereditary”) and those without. Licences in the reciprocal category stipulate that modifications to the software must also come under the same licence. Therefore, if a person makes a change to reciprocal software or includes some reciprocal-licensed code in his or her own software, that person cannot distribute the new work as closed-source software: he or she must only redistribute the new code under the same OSS licence. The GPL, which is the most popular copyleft licence, sets out the rationale for this stipulation as follows:
>  To protect your rights, we need to prevent others from denying you these rights or asking you to surrender the rights. Therefore, you have certain responsibilities if you distribute copies of the software, or if you modify it: responsibilities to respect the freedom of others.
>  For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, whether gratis or for a fee, you must pass on to the recipients the same freedoms that you received. You must make sure that they, too, receive or can get the source code.

Only some OSS licences contain this stipulation: other popular licences such as the MIT, BSD and Apache licences do not. Licences without this stipulation are generally referred to as permissive. In these cases, the author of any modifications is under no obligation to place his or her changes under the same licence, or even under a OSS licence at all. In general, the author of the modifications can even use and redistribute the modified software as a closed-source software application. The two different types of OSS licences are illustrated in the figure below.

(Image?)

However, blurring the distinction between these types of licences, different reciprocal licences stipulate varying degrees of when this reciprocal obligation to distribute under the same licence engages. This is perhaps the most confusing aspect of OSS licences and deserves careful attention. To determine whether a certain activity implicates a reciprocal obligation, one must consider (1) the type of distribution and (2) the extent of integration with the original code.

With respect to the type of distribution, reciprocal obligations only arise upon certain “distribution”-like activities. Where there is no such distribution, the licences almost always allow a person to use and modify reciprocal-licensed software without ever releasing their code. For example, a company can change and customize software under a reciprocal licence for in-house use, and it does not need to share this software or the software source code. However, a “distribution” does trigger a reciprocal obligation to distribute under the original licence. There are two common types of triggers found in OSS licences:

- **Distribution of Source or Object Code**: Distribution of the software, either through the internet or on a physical medium such as a CD, whether as source code or object code, is the most common trigger for a reciprocal obligation. For example, this is the trigger set out in the popular GPL licence.
- **Access over a computer network**: Found in the [GNU Affero General Public License](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/agpl-3.0.en.html) (AGPL), access over a computer network is a much broader trigger that imposes a reciprocal obligation whenever others access the licensed software over a computer network. This trigger aims to capture web service businesses that run their platforms on OSS – these businesses must make their source code available to others.

Even if the software is distributed, the reciprocal obligations still only extend to certain modifications (depending on the licence):

- **Derivative works**: As set out in the GPL, this type of reciprocal clause stipulates that the obligation applies to all “derivative works” (the U.S. analog of an “adaptation” under Canadian copyright law, likely with similar scope). The exact boundary of what constitutes a “derivative work” is hotly debated; however, it is clear that a mere “collection” of works does not trigger reciprocal obligations.
- **Collections** is where multiple software programs are distributed together (such as on the same CD-ROM), but where the programs do not tightly interact.
- **Derivative works w/a linking allowance**: The most prominent example of this type of clause is that found in the [GNU Lessor General Public License](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl-3.0.en.html) (LGPL). This licence is similar to the GPL, but it explicitly allows a person to statically or dynamically link their code to a LGPL software library, without triggering the reciprocal obligation (in software development, “linking” involves a loose coupling where one piece of the software communicates with other software and makes use of its functionality).
- **Modified files only**: Unique to the Mozilla Public License (MPL), this type of clause only imposes reciprocal obligations on modified files. If a derivative work contains files which are modified versions form the original work, as well as entirely new files, only the directly-modified original files implicate and fall under the reciprocal obligation.

The differences amongst the various licences in the popular GNU suite illustrate how the type of distribution and extent of integration interact to determine when a reciprocal obligation engages, as shown in the following table.

|            | **Derivative work of the original** | **Derivative work, but only links to original** | **Collection, including the unchanged original** |
| ---------- | ---------- | ---------- | ---------- |
| **Distribution of source code or object code** | GPLv3: **Yes**<br/>LGPLv3: **Yes**<br/>AGPLv3: **Yes** | GPLv3: **Yes**<br/>LGPLv3: **No**<br/>AGPLv3: **Yes** | GPLv3: **No**<br/>LGPLv3: **No**<br/>AGPLv3: **No** |
| **Provision of access over a computer network** | GPLv3: **No**<br/>LGPLv3: **No**<br/>AGPLv3: **Yes** | GPLv3: **No**<br/>LGPLv3: **No**<br/>AGPLv3: **Yes** | GPLv3: **No**<br/>LGPLv3: **No**<br/>AGPLv3: **No** |

### Gérer les obligations relatives aux licences

Lorsque des obligations réciproques de licence s'appliquent, vous n'avez pas l'avantage de pouvoir choisir une licence. Lorsque vous distribuez le logiciel, votre code doit, dans la mesure précisée dans la licence réciproque, être assujetti à la même licence ou, lorsque la licence le permet, à une version ultérieure de la même licence. Dans un tel cas, lorsque vous faites face à une obligation de licence réciproque, il existe trois façons de vous y conformer :

1. Ne distribuez pas votre logiciel.
2. Accordez une licence à votre logiciel en vertu de la même licence (ou, lorsque la licence le permet, une licence compatible).
3. Refondez des parties de votre logiciel de façon à ce qu'il ne contienne pas de code ou de bibliothèque visés par une licence réciproque (ou, à tout le moins, veillez à ce que votre code ne s'intègre pas étroitement au code réciproque au point où il soit assujetti à l'obligation y afférente).

Les fournisseurs de logiciels propriétaires optent habituellement pour la troisième façon lorsqu'ils remarquent la présence d'un code réciproque, étant donné qu'ils doivent distribuer leur logiciel aux clients payants, mais qu'ils ne veulent habituellement pas ouvrir le reste de leur code source à d'autres personnes. Il est donc important que ces fournisseurs procèdent à une vérification de « diligence raisonnable » de leurs projets logiciels en s'assurant que leur logiciel ne comporte pas de code de LL ou de bibliothèques assujettis à une obligation réciproque de licence.

De même, les organisations et les entreprises qui diffusent leur code en tant que LL devraient également effectuer des vérifications de diligence raisonnable. Bien qu'elles appliquent déjà une licence de LL, l'obligation réciproque de licence exige généralement que soit octroyée une licence au titre de la même licence. Par conséquent, la diffusion du code en vertu d'une autre licence de LL peut ne pas toujours être conforme. Il peut être nécessaire d'accorder deux licences à votre propre code en vertu de l'autre licence réciproque ou, comme dans le contexte des logiciels propriétaires, de veiller à ce que le logiciel ne comporte pas de code ou de bibliothèque qui fait que l'obligation réciproque entre en jeu. Bien que les obligations réciproques présentent l'ensemble de paramètres le plus strict, les organisations et les entreprises doivent également s'assurer qu'elles respectent les autres conditions de licence. Par exemple, ils doivent se conformer aux exigences relatives aux avis et aux obligations de distribution du code source original. Une vérification de diligence raisonnable permet de s'assurer de la présence de cette conformité.

Il existe deux méthodes générales pour effectuer une vérification de diligence raisonnable : la vérification de la provenance et la numérisation des codes.

#### Vérification de la provenance

La vérification de la provenance consiste à maintenir une piste de vérification minutieuse, c'est-à-dire que les développeurs tiennent des dossiers internes sur le code qui se trouve dans le projet, la façon dont ce code est utilisé et la licence qui s'applique à chaque élément. Certains développent des outils d'automatisation comme Maven (que les développeurs utilisent pour automatiser la compilation et le déploiement des codes) à des fins d'assistance de la fonctionnalité dans le but d'indiquer, de suivre et de signaler les licences dans un projet, pour ainsi faciliter et normalise la tenue de dossiers.

En examinant les dossiers de vérification interne, un expert en licences peut vérifier la conformité d'un projet, que ce soit lorsqu'un développeur ajoute un nouvel élément externe ou lors de la diffusion du logiciel (ou les deux). Une nouvelle analyse juridique du texte de la licence n'est pas requise pour chaque nouvelle bibliothèque importée dans un projet. Une fois qu'un gestionnaire de licence approuve l'utilisation d'une licence particulière dans le cadre d'un projet, les développeurs peuvent généralement utiliser en toute sécurité d'autres bibliothèques sous la même licence, pourvu qu'ils les utilisent de la même façon. Par exemple, une entreprise ou une organisation peut élaborer une politique à l'égard d'un projet qui accorde l'approbation automatique de licences permissives particulières, notamment BSD, MIT et Apache, approuve des licences réciproques faibles, notamment la LGPL au cas par cas, et approuve des licences réciproques fortes, notamment la GPL, mais uniquement après une analyse juridique attentive et exhaustive.

#### Numérisation automatisée des codes

Dans bien des cas, la vérification de la provenance devrait être suffisante pour les petits projets. Toutefois, cela peut se révéler peu pratique pour les grandes entreprises ou les grands projets. Une grande entreprise possède souvent des codes acquis d'autres parties ou des codes obtenus à la suite d'acquisitions et de fusions, qui peuvent ne pas faire l'objet d'une vérification de licence précise. Dans ce cas, il est préférable d'utiliser des outils de numérisation automatisée des codes qui font une recherche dans toute la base de codes pour déterminer les licences qui s'appliquent. Les utilitaires de numérisation automatisée des codes recherchent des fichiers texte et des commentaires de code intégrés qui peuvent identifier la licence applicable à un élément particulier du logiciel. Certains outils comparent même le code lui-même au code de LL d'un tiers connu.

Bien que ces outils puissent se révéler très utiles, il faut garder à l'esprit que les résultats ne donnent pas la certitude que le code source relève uniquement des licences déclarées, ni qu'il est libre de droits d'auteur ou de contrefaçon de brevet. L'une des limites inhérentes de la vérification a trait au fait qu'elle ne peut comparer le code source du client qu'à une vaste collection, mais non exhaustive, d'autres dépôts de codes sources. Il se peut qu'elle ne détecte pas le code source protégé par le droit d'auteur des fournisseurs de logiciels propriétaires ou le code source des petits projets de LL. Dans la mesure du possible, les entreprises et les organisations peuvent également réduire leurs risques et faciliter la tâche de vérification en utilisant les bibliothèques de logiciels d'organisations fiables qui ont déjà vérifié le code de la bibliothèque.

### Gestion des brevets et autres questions juridiques

Toutes les considérations juridiques relatives aux LL qui s'appliquent lorsque vous utilisez des LL s'appliquent également lorsque vous diffusez ceux-ci. L'absence d'avertissement et de garantie peut jouer en votre faveur dans le cas des logiciels que vous diffusez. L'absence d'un choix de tribune ou d'une clause de droit crée une incertitude juridique égale pour toutes les parties. En plus de ces questions juridiques, la diffusion de LL soulève des préoccupations liées aux brevets. En accordant une licence pour votre code en vertu d'une licence de LL, vous pouvez, implicitement ou explicitement, délivrer une licence pour les brevets que vous possédez si l'un des codes les concerne. Il est important de comprendre la nature et la portée des licences de brevet que vous accordez.

#### Portée de la licence de brevet

Le traitement des brevets varie considérablement d'une licence de LL à l'autre. Traditionnellement – comme on le constate encore dans le cas des licences permissives populaires telles que BSD et MIT – la licence de brevet est implicite : aucune mention relative à un brevet n'y apparaît. On y énonce plutôt que le droit d'utilisation du logiciel accorde implicitement l'autorisation au licencié d'« utiliser » tout brevet pertinent détenu par le concédant. Une licence implicite accorde certainement à d'autres le droit d'utiliser le code original tel qu'il a été distribué, y compris lorsqu'une telle utilisation implique un brevet détenu par le concédant. Toutefois, la portée d'une licence implicite devient moins claire lorsque les parties en aval modifient le code original. Lorsque les modifications touchent l'« utilisation » prévue du logiciel, la licence de brevet originale couvre-t-elle toujours une utilisation qui est différente de ce que la licence avait prévu à l'origine? Si une nouvelle utilisation contrevient à un brevet différent détenu par le concédant original, est-ce que l'octroi de droits étendus d'apporter des modifications va jusqu'à accorder une licence à cet autre brevet? Il est fort probable que la réponse à ces deux questions est « non », c'est-à-dire que la concession implicite de brevet ne couvre souvent que les utilisations impliquées par les contributions originales du concédant, mais pas les autres utilisations que pourraient comporter d'autres caractéristiques et modifications. La plupart des licences modernes de LL tentent d'accroître la clarté et la certitude juridique en rendant explicite cette limitation de la portée. Par exemple, la licence d'Apache version 2.0 prévoit ce qui suit :
>  « Sous réserve des dispositions de la présente licence, chaque contributeur vous accorde par la présente une licence de brevet perpétuelle, de portée mondiale, non exclusive, exempte de frais et de redevances et irrévocable (sauf stipulation contraire à la présente section) pour l'exécution par ou pour vous, l'utilisation, l'offre d'aliénation, l'aliénation, l'importation ou la cession des Travaux, étant précisé que ladite licence ne s'applique qu'aux revendications assujetties au régime de l'autorisation par lesdits contributeurs en raison de contrefaçons consécutives à leur seule Contribution ou à la fois à leur Contribution et aux travaux ayant fait l'objet de ladite Contribution » [TRADUCTION]. En vertu de cette clause, la licence de brevet ne s'applique qu'aux utilisations des logiciels applicables aux contributions existantes. Lorsque d'autres contributions en aval modifient l'utilisation du logiciel, la licence de brevet originale peut ne plus s'appliquer.
Bien qu'une licence de LL puisse accorder une licence de brevet plus étendue qui couvrirait les modifications en aval, aucune licence populaire n'adopte actuellement cette approche. Même la licence GPLv3, qui revendique une grande liberté, ne permet pas une telle concession. Étant donné le nombre presque illimité de façons dont des caractéristiques supplémentaires pourraient modifier l'utilisation typique d'une application logicielle, une licence aussi étendue est probablement insoutenable pour la plupart des entreprises qui gèrent un portefeuille de brevets.

Par conséquent, à titre de pratique exemplaire, vous devez, chaque fois que vous modifiez un LL, déterminer si les modifications visent l'utilisation du logiciel d'une manière qui pourrait impliquer d'autres licences de brevet ou faisant en sorte que les licences de brevet existantes ne couvrent pas la nouvelle utilisation.

#### Clauses de résiliation de brevet et de représailles

De nombreuses licences de LL tentent de protéger le logiciel contre les poursuites pour contrefaçon de brevet en incluant des clauses de résiliation automatique. Ces clauses s'appliquent chaque fois qu'un titulaire de licence allègue qu'une partie du logiciel viole son brevet. Par exemple, la [licence Apache version 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.html) énonce succinctement ce qui suit :
>  « Lorsque vous entreprenez une procédure relative à un brevet contre une entité (notamment une demande entre défendeurs ou une demande reconventionnelle) faisant valoir que les Travaux ou qu'une Contribution intégrée dans les Travaux constitue une contrefaçon de brevet directe ou une complicité de contrefaçon, alors toutes les licences de brevet qui vous ont été octroyées au titre de la présente Licence à l'égard des Travaux sera résiliée dès le moment où ladite procédure est entreprise ». [TRADUCTION]

Les éléments déclencheurs de la résiliation varient d'une licence à l'autre. Par exemple, contrairement à la licence Apache version 2.0, la [version 2 de la licence publique Mozilla](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/MPL/2.0/) (MPLv2) permet explicitement aux parties de se défendre par des demandes reconventionnelles et des demandes entre défendeurs de contrefaçon de brevet, sans pour autant que ne soit mise en application la clause de résiliation.

Certaines licences comportent également des clauses de représailles étendues, c'est-à-dire une résiliation plus étendue des droits. La clause de résiliation du brevet de la version 2.0 d'Apache, énoncée ci-dessus, ne met fin qu'aux licences de brevet. Par contre, la MPLv2 met fin à tous les droits en vertu du droit d'auteur et du droit des brevets. Lorsque l'on est impliqué dans une procédure relative à la contrefaçon d'un brevet, qu'il s'agisse d'une action initiale ou d'une demande reconventionnelle, il est important d'évaluer soigneusement l'incidence0 que cela pourrait avoir sur tout LL que vous utilisez ou auquel vous contribuez.
